this video is sponsored by Nvidia who
reached out to me asking for an in-depth
analysis of DSS in Wolfenstein
Youngblood similar to what I did last
year with control Wolfenstein
youngbloodz graphics are interesting for
two reasons firstly it's based on the
same engine as Doom was so it looks
great and runs quickly and secondly it
has just received ray-tracing and a fee
LSS support I hope to answer three
questions about DL SS with this video
number one is it finally better than the
alternatives number two how does it
perform with ray-tracing
and three how high can I get my frame
rates with it enabled check out this
video's description for timestamps to
these parts part one is it finally
better than the alternatives because the
answer used to be no shadow of the Tomb
Raider and battlefield 5 supported it
but it made everything look blobby
in fact you could get better their image
quality and frame rates just by dropping
the resolution and by enabling temporal
anti-aliasing as in video of said in
that blog post though DL SS is
constantly learning and improving an
example of this last year that I covered
was with control which was definitely
better than it was with battlefield 5 I
concluded that it wasn't without his
problems but it generally did a better
job of removing pixelation than to
morold it and often with less blur and
now Wolfenstein Youngblood has the
latest version of DL SS yet to test the
visual quality I run the game at the low
resolution of 720p to really make the
differences between the modes obvious
firstly without anti-aliasing
particularly of the labs benchmark you
can see the problem stray pixels are
sparkling all over the place and the
entire picture looks unclean I feel that
as games have gotten increasingly
detailed the need for anti-aliasing has
only increased and without it Youngblood
looks like a much older game than it
should do the normal solution is to add
a post-process anti-aliasing by far the
best and Wolfenstein is tss 8a which
I'll be using in this video to compare
with DL SS using it you can see that
everything's a bit out of focus it also
tends to make small details excessively
blotchy or bright looking you can really
see it on these digital numbers here or
on the grill in front of this light and
now we move on to DL SS quality which
doesn't suffer from these problem
you can see that it more faithfully
preserves the colors of these digital
numbers as seen in the middle from a 4k
screenshot of the same scene and this
white thing is a distant light behind a
grill which the LSS again preserves
better than temporal super sampling does
which has a tendency to swallow up the
darker bits in the lights glow and with
the laser grid at the end of the
benchmark while TL SS takes a few frames
to resolve the beams after they've
emerged from behind the pipe it then
renders them beautifully and smoothly
dare I say doing a better job than even
the 4k example does in comparison
temporal super samplings lines remain
connected but shimmer noticeably and
normal temporal fails spectacularly with
so few pixels to build an image from so
DLS s is in some ways fastly superior to
alternative anti-aliasing methods and
here's the kicker it runs at a higher
frame rate even when compared with using
no anti-aliasing at all it's all this
looks very impressive for DL SS for it
to manage similar visual quality at a
higher frame rate than the alternatives
seems too good to be true and opens up
many possibilities which I'll be
covering in this video but before then
let's cover its downsides in motion it
looks extremely similar or better than
tempura or super sampling does but pause
it look closely flip between examples
and you may be able to spot how it does
this the reason it can perform at a
higher frame rate at any resolution is
because it's actually running at a lower
one and then upscaling so when I say I
tested it at 720p while tempura was at
720p DL SS runs up much lower it's hard
to say for sure what the exact
resolution is but digital foundry
calculated that quality is 66 percent of
the resolution and performance is just
50% and balanced is somewhere in between
in other words at that quality setting I
was using TLS s is using just 44% of the
number of pixels that temporal super
sampling does and then uses machine
learning to try and bring it back up to
720p quality again I suspect it does
this over a number of frames so if
you're stood still staring or something
then it's probably had enough time to
make it look really nice but if you
wildly swing your vision about each
frame might not look quite so good it's
just that you won't notice this because
you're partly swinging your head
about so what might you notice from
switching to D LSS for a start you lose
sparks temporal sue for something does a
good job with these
but DL SS all but removed them
presumably mistaking them for aliasing
you get the odd visible wisp before they
fade out of existence again there's also
a bit more shimmer on like bloom in
certain situations and I think being a
lower-resolution
it misses off the pixels touching the
edge of the screen particularly on the
fastest performance setting at 720p if
we zoom in and slow down the footage you
can see it's almost as though it's
trying to fill in these rows with old
information so those other things that
you might notice when playing there are
also a few differences that you can spot
if you freeze a moving shot but these
are things that you won't notice if
you're playing the game at say 60fps or
more upscaling can do some things very
well but trees are something it
struggles with like I've said if you
stare at a tree than it'll will look
fine but when it's moving the LSS
doesn't have the time to smooth the
image out and rather than to pixelate it
chooses to hide the twigs which you can
see in this 720p comparison with
temporal super sampling here we humans
are good with letters we know what
they're supposed to look like and no one
in an upscale er gets them wrong in the
benchmarks if you inspect the letters
closely then DL SS did tend to be a tiny
tiny bit less clear than temporal did on
signs of their distance given how much
lower TLS assisters resolution is it's
impressive how well it holds up but this
is a giveaway that the resolution is a
bit lower and probably because of that
godrays look less defined as though
they're being calculated with lower
precision and there's a bug with the
light beams take a look at this light in
the distance DL SS makes it look less
like a beam and more like a cloud it's
as though it's something to do with the
LS s lower resolution again that causes
the particles to be drawn the wrong size
so in conclusion when it comes to visual
quality TL SS does some things better
and other things worse than a higher
native resolution would in game motion
masks many of its weaknesses but I think
the switch to DL SS loses you a bit of
visual clarity in exchange for extremely
good anti-aliasing and a lot of extra
fps so that's if we compare them all at
720p
what if we compared the same frame rates
TL SS performance at 4k conveniently
runs almost identically to 1440p with
temporal super sampling so let's see
which is best of a hundred FPS the
conclusion here is that the LSS is 4k
resolution makes distant stuff clearer
and it does a better job of
anti-aliasing edges but it comes with a
few bugs of its own which I'll show in
the following examples we start the
comparisons here and concede er s s is
oversized glow around the distant light
and temporals oversized color around the
shops logo for KD LS s extra resolution
over 40 Pootie P really stands out if we
look at the text on the poster here note
how it says press C above it move to
1440p temporal sue for something and you
can't even read it for KD LS s might not
be 4k but it shows signs that it's got
something to read that scales beyond
1440p it also helps with the branches
temporal cuts them off early but d LS s
attempts to render the smaller twigs
albeit with a few extra artifacts it
absolutely destroys 1440p for visual
clarity on this distant tree TL s s is
4k resolution here helps to define
answer separate some of the details
which can appear slightly muddy at 1440p
bear in mind that 1440p is not exactly a
low resolution we're ready comparing
details and put cut off between quite
high resolutions moving to the 3rd
comparison and you can see that DL SS
interferes with the light beams making
them distinctly less ray light and
temporal does DL SS makes the details in
this shop crisper though curiously in
the ray-traced reflections temporal at
sharper I'll cover ray tracing later on
in the video this angle is a clear win
for DL SS zoom in on the car and you can
see how much more smoothly it draws the
high contrast edges there's still a bit
of speckle above the doors but not as
much as with temporal and other
artifacts with temporal is how it holds
onto old colors for a while the red of
the car is painted onto the background
for several frames after its passed by
DL s s doesn't suffer from this now I
love this bike wheel as it's perfect for
comparing anti-aliasing however at this
distance
neither method draws the spokes I'll now
play the demo in slow motions you can
see how both methods go about
visualizing the spokes as we
closer to them temporal super sampling
starts sooner DLS s is a lot more
cautious but then does a worse job when
it finally does looking more like 1080p
than 4k a win to temporal super sampling
remember that for any upcoming Tour de
France games look over to the logo on
the wall here and it looks as though DL
SS is is blurrier but I think it's
another bug that amplifies the heat haze
effect when it's on similar to the
lighting bugs mentioned earlier once we
get past this haze you can see that DL
SS renders the high contrast edges a lot
better on to the second benchmark now as
the grid floor extends into the distance
DL SS blurs the lines of holes all in
too long connected blobs temporal super
sampling seems to do a better job with
them you can make out the motion
artifacts behind the table legs in both
examples showing how much modern
anti-aliasing borrows from past frames
look to the far wall and DL s s
perfectly anti-alias is where the X rays
meet the white outline temporal super
sampling blends a few of the edges but
misses others it's not even close if
you're wondering what those red fringes
on the left sides of the picture frames
are it's reflecting the light from this
side of the room
DLS s also draws the test tubes and
their holders which fade into the
background with temporal super sampling
both methods struggle along the edge of
these transparent glass things but
temporal edges appear higher resolution
in this example zoom into this bit of
the image and DSS's 4k resolution helps
to define the stairs computer screens
and distant jeeps the grilles on the
floor are interesting both methods look
similar up close but as they move away
from the camera
DLS s prioritizes the light strips while
temporal prefers the dark ones over to
the other side of the image and temporal
continues to make red areas appear
thicker than they should do he also
directs the colors of this beam across
the ground behind it though to give it
credit this computer terminal looks
clearer than with TLS s the reason i've
been testing tssaa a in this video is
because it does a better job than just
regular taa which struggles to draw
these laser lines but when comparing TLS
s and TSSAA a both techniques do a good
job of the laser grid when it's up this
close you can see TLS s overly blurring
the sparks again but to its credit its
high resolution helps preserve more
details and the text on this
if I knew German I might even be able to
make out this word here you can see that
with temporal super sampling that is
dragging the red from the laces across
lights behind them again but the most
extreme example I found of this is in
this next scene if we slow it down the
black mesh from the windows remains on
the ground long after it should have
done something DL SS doesn't suffer from
at all DL SS also makes the evil enemy
logo much clearer and it preserves the
black grid in front of the light which
temporal fades away entirely DL SS does
a better job of drawing details on the
service and pipes and background too
this example is a big win to DL SS and
last is this comparison shot both
techniques struggle with the laser grid
in different ways and I'm going to give
the win to temporal on the grills on
this floor but the big thing here are in
great rais'd reflections even though
we're comparing it from the same camera
angle there are different spots I can't
for the life of me figure out which one
is closer to how it's meant to be but
luckily I'll be moving on to the
radiation part of this video in a second
so in conclusion for the same frame rate
for KT LSS preserves small and distant
details better 1440p temporals image
quality is generally lower but you know
what you're getting with it if it sees
jaggies it blurs them and this approach
can sometimes work out in its favor both
techniques come with their own quirks
and bucks and it will be down to your
own personal preference which you prefer
when it comes to image quality when
comparing DL SS to other methods I think
how I've just done it by comparing
similar frame rates is the fairest way
to go about it for KD LSS isn't 4k nor
is it 1440p nor is it 1080p it sports
qualities of various different
resolutions and I think it's best to
forget the resolution and just to judge
it and the other anti-aliasing methods
on their image quality at any given
frame rate TLS s has uses no matter how
you like to play the game it helps to
bring out more intricate details at
higher resolutions and at lower
resolutions it can construct an image
from not much at all and activating it
at any GPU limited resolution will
immensely boost frame rates also it's a
nice one-click solution to something
that otherwise requires manual
adjustments to three or more in-game
properties my advice to you if you
choose to use it would be to keep the
LSS on quality setting if you game at
lower resolutions and then to slider
over to
performance as you approach higher ones
like 4k where individual pixels matter
less now on to the second part of the
video where I talk about how the LSS
runs with the ray tracing I suspect a
major reason for the LSS in the first
place was to make the jump to ray
tracing more feasible I don't think
anybody was expecting real-time ray
tracing for another few generations and
when it came I expected it to only be
possible at lower resolutions at first
it works by shooting out millions and
millions of Ray's per frame either to
light up or to reflect things accurately
it's the easiest way of reducing the
load is to lower the resolution since
then there are fewer pixels needed to
run the calculations on which is what
the LSS does without ray tracing I can
run the game at a hundred and thirteen
FPS at maximum settings at 4k the
turning ray tracing on sends that down
to 60 it's honestly impressive for ray
tracing to still be playable in native
4k but turning DL SS on to performance
mode brings this back up to 108 FPS
again so enabling ray tracing
effectively halves the frame rate and
then DSS can be used to bring it almost
backups the same again but how does the
visual quality compare testing this
wasn't as easy as you might think
there's a bit of head Bob so your view
is always subtly changing position which
I don't think helps temporal
anti-aliasing techniques at all the game
also likes to sneakily enable resolution
scaling but only when I least expected
it so I had to redo these recordings a
few times and it's making seem more
difficult my companion quite enjoyed
doing this but I eventually managed some
good recordings and I found a nice
reflective window to do them in well
this is where it gets interesting
dropping the resolution to 720p we can
really see them pixels disabling
anti-aliasing turns the image into a
horribly speckly mess if you're gaming
with ray tracing you'll need
anti-aliasing but which method to use
temporal super sampling does a
spectacular job of blurring those pixels
together into a coherent image even
showing some ratings and stuff that
weren't visible without anti-aliasing
and switching to DSS performance reveals
something very interesting and likely
unintended it checkerboards the
reflection it isn't anti aliased at all
I suspect DSS does this to the whole
image and then uses AI to blend it all
together into a smooth result but for
whatever reason
it doesn't blend ray-traced reflections
leaving them in their original low
resolution checkerboard state if digital
foundry is correct then TLS s
performance runs at exactly 50 percent
the screens resolution making this
checkerboarding particularly noticeable
moving to quality ups the resolution a
bit but also means that the pixels no
longer line up so perfectly blurring the
result which makes the check boarding
less noticeable but still there so
whatever's happening here the LSS
doesn't render ray-traced reflections as
accurately as temporal super sampling
does this checkerboarding is noticeable
on highly reflective surfaces when
you're standing still if you move then
it blurs it and the check boarding
disappears another way of making it less
noticeable is to up the resolution let's
go back to the 4k TLS s versus 1440p
temporal super sampling as these two
alternatives run equally well so here's
the LS s and here's temporal super
sampling let's just run between them at
a few times it's hard to know how the
image would have looked had DL SS
properly blended in a while I'm not
gonna give TL SS credit for this
I hope the images resolution are not
scaled it using gigapixel to see how it
might have looked if AI was used to
blend the result and indeed details are
preserved in the eagle's wings and on
the balconies that aren't as clear in
the temporal super sampling version but
unless and Vidya roll out an update to
the DL SS in this game we won't know for
sure how their own upscaling would have
handled it but this checkerboarding does
perhaps explain why reflections with the
LS s are less clear than those with
temporal super sampling even when in
motion I mentioned earlier the
reflections were in different places
with DL SS and with temporal super
sampling but there's more to it than
that
now when I say they're in different
places I don't mean that they're lagging
behind there may be small differences
here or they're based on framerate or
whatever but I'm happy to ignore that
because there's something bigger to
cover here that being how some of the
reflections stretch has along the y-axis
further than others TLS s always roughly
matches up with the reflections when
there's no anti-aliasing and at least at
1080p or above temporal super sampling
looks more stretched
I tested this twice at 1080p 1440p and
at 4k and the results remained
consistent also 4k reflections were
always a bit more stretched than at
lower resolutions regardless of the
anti-aliasing method used not
this matters too much but it is bizarre
that differences can occur with great
racing which is supposed to simulate
real life something the LSS does well
with is to reduce the shimmering on
rougher surfaces or at least those which
don't have a mirror finish
we'll start with temporal super
something here and you'll see that this
aggressive shimmering is noticeable at
all distances regardless of whether
you're stood still or moving TL SS is
equally specular at motion at the moment
you stand still it begins to stabilize
the reflection bringing the shimmer down
to karma levels for this to be reduced
further I believe either ray-tracing
needs more samples per frame or for the
anti-aliasing to average itself over
even more frames which I think will come
with time also if you're wondering why
the reflections look so odds at the end
of the underground tunnel in this scene
I believe that what we're seeing here is
a parallax corrected cube map which is
broadly used in reflections of
reflections and wherever the real world
isn't rendered in the reflections this
is done to reduce the performance impact
that ray tracing will have and might
explain why it's still playable in this
game even at 4k and now it's the last
bit of this video what if you don't care
about graphics but instead simply want
the highest frame rates possible let's
see how much performance I could squeeze
from the game by dropping the settings
starting at 4k maximum settings
ray-tracing and tomorrow I get an
average of 60 fps the sampling rate
racing made it shoot up to 116 fps then
dropping all the settings from maximum
to minimum may decline further to 146
FPS average but let's go further still
from here I unable to TLS s performance
and my average rose to 177 fps of 4k
with a minimum of 142 in case you were
wondering now to drop the resolution to
1440p with temporal I'm getting 254 FPS
average with TLS s 297 dropping down to
1080p and the frame rates rise further
to 329 with temporal and then 336 with
TLS s dropping to 720p only increases it
to 346 and 238 so at this point we're
cpu limited in my situation there wasn't
much point in doing this I have a 2080
TI which is one of the most powerful
graphics cards out there so I'm one of a
lucky few who can get playable
performance with this game whichever
settings I choose
yet even with this card I was GPU
limited beyond 1080p in other words a
1440p or above the LSS helped to
significantly improve my frame rates the
users with less powerful graphics cards
I suspect they'd see improvements even
at 1080p or even down as far as 720p
depending on their computer specs and
how demanding the game is in conclusion
D LSS as it is in Wolfenstein Youngblood
is already worth using not just for a
choice between good anti-aliasing or for
improved performance but because it can
offer a bit of both at the same time
TLS s strikes an appealing balance
between visual quality and frame rate
and is an extremely novel solution to a
problem that games have had since time
began it isn't without its flaws like
how it hides sparks or how ray-traced
reflections aren't smoothed and
depending on your reasons for using DL
SS these issues can range from slight to
quite severe like in a game with
slow-moving gameplay where you spend a
lot of time staring at ray-traced
mirrors it would be better not to use
this version of TLS s but Youngblood is
not that kind of game I like that the
LSS now offers different settings which
gives you a little bit more control but
I think Nvidia could be even more
transparent with how it works it's
obvious that there's more to DL SS than
being just a low resolution upscaled but
it would be nice for than to state what
resolution the base image is rendered at
just to give us some more information to
go on but thank you to Nvidia for
sponsoring this video and for giving me
an excuse to spend days staring at
pixels they've pretty much let me do and
say whatever I've wanted which it turns
out is a 20 minute long video staring at
things that most people will never
notice as an example a few years ago I
play through doom with temporal super
sampling on and since then have assumed
that it's the absolute best
anti-aliasing method to use in modern
games but through this video I've
noticed that it isn't without its
problems either every method has its
strengths and weaknesses and I hope this
video has helped educate you on DL SSE's
for now it's still early days for DL SS
it's only supported by the GeForce mm
series starting with the 2060 which is a
powerful part so it could be a while
before owners feel the need to run these
cards with TLS s at 720p right now DL SS
is mostly used to make graphically
intensive effects like rate racing more
playable or for helping competitive
players to reach higher frame rates than
before but I think in the future TL SS
could become a tool to help squeeze more
life out of systems that sit on the
minimum spec to help them to attain
coherent visual quality of playable
framerates where there might not be any
other way of them doing so we'll just
have to wait and see I guess if you want
to learn more I suggest you check out in
videos blog post where they talk about
the technology and Youngblood they also
have another one for deliver us to the
moon another game with recent DL SS
support links in the description